https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/stata/output/regression-analysis/

> This page shows an example regression analysis with footnotes explaining the
output.  These data were collected on 200 high schools students and are
scores on various tests, including science, math, reading and social studies (socst).
The variable female is a dichotomous variable coded 1 if the student was
female and 0 if male.

# Regression Analysis | Stata Annotated Output
This page shows an example regression analysis with footnotes explaining the output.  These data were collected on 200 high schools students and are scores on various tests, including science, math, reading and social studies (**socst**). The variable **female** is a dichotomous variable coded 1 if the student was female and 0 if male.

**use https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/stat/stata/notes/hsb2**
(highschool and beyond (200 cases))

**regress science math female socst read**

      Source |       SS       df       MS              Number of obs =     200
-------------+------------------------------           F(  4,   195) =   46.69
       Model |  9543.72074     4  2385.93019           Prob > F      =  0.0000
    Residual |  9963.77926   195  51.0963039           R-squared     =  0.4892
-------------+------------------------------           Adj R-squared =  0.4788
       Total |     19507.5   199  98.0276382           Root MSE      =  7.1482

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     science |      Coef.   Std. Err.      t    P>|t|     \[95% Conf. Interval\]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
        math |   .3893102   .0741243     5.25   0.000      .243122    .5354983
      female |  -2.009765   1.022717    -1.97   0.051    -4.026772    .0072428
       socst |   .0498443    .062232     0.80   0.424    -.0728899    .1725784
        read |   .3352998   .0727788     4.61   0.000     .1917651    .4788345
       \_cons |   12.32529   3.193557     3.86   0.000     6.026943    18.62364
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* * *

Anova Table
-----------

      Source**a** |       SS**b**       df**c**       MS**d**
-------------+------------------------------
       Model |  9543.72074     4  2385.93019
    Residual |  9963.77926   195  51.0963039
-------------+------------------------------
       Total |     19507.5   199  98.0276382

a. **Source** – This is the source of variance, Model, Residual, and Total. The Total variance is partitioned into the variance which can be explained by the independent variables (Model) and the variance which is not explained by the independent variables (Residual, sometimes called Error). Note that the Sums of Squares for the Model and Residual add up to the Total Variance, reflecting the fact that the Total Variance is partitioned into Model and Residual variance.

b. **SS** – These are the Sum of Squares associated with the three sources of variance, Total, Model and Residual. These can be computed in many ways. Conceptually, these formulas can be expressed as: SSTotal     The total variability around the mean.  S(Y – Ybar)2. SSResidual  The sum of squared errors in prediction. S(Y – Ypredicted)2. SSModel     The improvement in prediction by using the predicted value of Y over just using the mean of Y. Hence, this would be the squared differences between the predicted value of Y and the mean of Y, S(Ypredicted – Ybar)2. Another way to think of this is the SSModel is SSTotal – SSResidual. Note that the SSTotal = SSModel + SSResidual.  Note that SSModel / SSTotal is equal to .4892, the value of R-Square.  This is because R-Square is the proportion of the variance explained by the independent variables, hence can be computed by SSModel / SSTotal.

c. **df** – These are the degrees of freedom associated with the sources of variance.  The total variance has N-1 degrees of freedom.  In this case, there were N=200 students, so the DF for total is 199.  The model degrees of freedom corresponds to the number of predictors minus 1 (K-1).  You may think this would be 4-1 (since there were 4 independent variables in the model, **math**, **female**, **socst** and **read**). But, the intercept is automatically included in the model (unless you explicitly omit the intercept).  Including the intercept, there are 5 predictors, so the model has 5-1=4 degrees of freedom.  The Residual degrees of freedom is the DF total minus the DF model, 199 – 4 is 195.

d. **MS** – These are the Mean Squares, the Sum of Squares divided by their respective DF.  For the Model,

9543.72074 / 4 = 2385.93019.  For the Residual, 9963.77926 / 195 =

51.0963039.  These are computed so you can compute the F ratio, dividing the Mean Square Model by the Mean Square Residual to test the significance of the predictors in the model.

* * *

Overall Model Fit
-----------------

Number of obs**e** =     200
F(  4,   195)**f** =   46.69
Prob > F**f**      =  0.0000
R-squared**g**     =  0.4892
Adj R-squared**h** =  0.4788
Root MSE**i**      =  7.1482

e. **Number of obs** – This is the number of observations used in the regression analysis.

f. **F** and **Prob > F** – The F-value is the Mean Square Model (2385.93019) divided by the Mean Square Residual (51.0963039), yielding F=46.69.  The p-value associated with this F value is very small (0.0000). These values are used to answer the question “Do the independent variables reliably predict the dependent variable?”.  The p-value is compared to your alpha level (typically 0.05) and, if smaller, you can conclude “Yes, the independent variables reliably predict the dependent variable”.  You could say that the group of variables **math** and **female** can be used to reliably predict **science** (the dependent variable).  If the p-value were greater than 0.05, you would say that the group of independent variables does not show a statistically significant relationship with the dependent variable, or that the group of independent variables does not reliably predict the dependent variable.  Note that this is an overall significance test assessing whether the group of independent variables when used together reliably predict the dependent variable, and does not address the ability of any of the particular independent variables to predict the dependent variable.  The ability of each individual independent variable to predict the dependent variable is addressed in the table below where each of the individual variables are listed.

g. **R-squared** – R-Squared is the proportion of variance in the dependent variable (**science**) which can be predicted from the independent variables (**math,** **female**, **socst** and **read**).  This value indicates that 48.92% of the variance in science scores can be predicted from the variables **math,** **female**, **socst** and **read**.  Note that this is an overall measure of the strength of association, and does not reflect the extent to which any particular independent variable is associated with the dependent variable.

h. **Adj R-squared** – Adjusted R-square.  As predictors are added to the model, each predictor will explain some of the variance in the dependent variable simply due to chance.  One could continue to add predictors to the model which would continue to improve the ability of the predictors to explain the dependent variable, although some of this increase in R-square would be simply due to chance variation in that particular sample.  The adjusted R-square attempts to yield a more honest value to estimate the R-squared for the population.   The value of R-square was .4892, while the value of Adjusted R-square was .4788  Adjusted R-squared is computed using the formula 1 – ((1 – Rsq)((N – 1) /( N – k – 1)).  From this formula, you can see that when the number of observations is small and the number of predictors is large, there will be a much greater difference between R-square and adjusted R-square (because the ratio of (N – 1) / (N – k – 1) will be much greater  than 1).  By contrast, when the number of observations is very large compared to the number of predictors, the value of R-square and adjusted R-square will be much closer because the ratio of (N – 1)/(N – k – 1) will approach 1.

i. **Root MSE** – Root MSE is the standard deviation of the error term, and is the square root of the Mean Square Residual (or Error).

* * *

Parameter Estimates
-------------------

\------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    science**j** |     Coef.**k**   Std. Err.**l**    t**m**    P>|t|**m**    \[95% Conf. Interval\]**n**
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
        math |   .3893102   .0741243     5.25   0.000      .243122    .5354983
      female |  -2.009765   1.022717    -1.97   0.051    -4.026772    .0072428
       socst |   .0498443    .062232     0.80   0.424    -.0728899    .1725784
        read |   .3352998   .0727788     4.61   0.000     .1917651    .4788345
       \_cons |   12.32529   3.193557     3.86   0.000     6.026943    18.62364
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

j. **science** – This column shows the dependent variable at the top (**science**) with the predictor variables below it (**math,** **female**, **socst**, **read** and **\_cons**). The last variable (**\_cons**) represents the constant, also referred to in textbooks as the Y intercept, the height of the regression line when it crosses the Y axis.  In other words, this is the predicted value of **science** when all other variables are 0.

k. **Coef.** – These are the values for the regression equation for predicting the dependent variable from the independent variable. The regression equation is presented in many different ways, for example:

**Ypredicted = b0 + b1\*x1 + b2\*x2 + b3\*x3 + b4\*x4**

The column of estimates (coefficients or parameter estimates, from here on labeled coefficients) provides the values for b0, b1, b2, b3 and b4 for this equation.  Expressed in terms of the variables used in this example, the regression equation is

 **sciencePredicted = 12.32529 + .3893102\*math + -2.009765\*female+.0498443\*socst+.3352998\*read**

These estimates tell you about the relationship between the independent variables and the dependent variable. These estimates tell the amount of increase in science scores that would be predicted by a 1 unit increase in the predictor.  Note: For the independent variables which are not significant, the coefficients are not significantly different from 0, which should be taken into account when interpreting the coefficients.  (See the columns with the t-value and p-value about testing whether the coefficients are significant). **math** – The coefficient (parameter estimate) is

.3893102.  So, for every unit (i.e., point, since this is the metric in which the tests are measured) increase in **math**, a .3893102 unit increase in **science** is predicted, holding all other variables constant. (It does not matter at what value you hold the other variables constant, because it is a linear model.)  Or, for every increase of one point on the **math** test, your science score is predicted to be higher by .3893102 points.  This is significantly different from 0. **female** – For every unit increase in **female**, there is a

\-2.009765 unit decrease in the predicted **science** score, holding all other variables constant.  Since **female** is coded 0/1 (0=male, 1=female) the interpretation can be put more simply.  For females the predicted science score would be 2 points lower than for males.  The variable **female** is technically not statistically significantly different from 0, because the p-value is greater than .05.  However, .051 is so close to .05 that some researchers would still consider it to be statistically significant. **socst** – The coefficient for **socst** is .0498443. This means that for a 1-unit increase in the social studies score, we expect an approximately .05 point increase in the science score.  This is not statistically significant; in other words, .0498443 is not different from 0. **read** – The coefficient for **read** is .3352998. Hence, for every unit increase in reading score we expect a .34 point increase in the science score.  This is statistically significant.

l. **Std. Err.** – These are the standard errors associated with the coefficients.  The standard error is used for testing whether the parameter is significantly different from 0 by dividing the parameter estimate by the standard error to obtain a t-value (see the column with t-values and p-values).  The standard errors can also be used to form a confidence interval for the parameter, as shown in the last two columns of this table.

m. **t** and **P>|t|** – These columns provide the t-value and 2-tailed p-value used in testing the null hypothesis that the coefficient (parameter) is 0.   If you use a 2-tailed test, then you would compare each p-value to your pre-selected value of alpha.  Coefficients having p-values less than alpha are statistically significant.  For example, if you chose alpha to be 0.05, coefficients having a p-value of 0.05 or less would be statistically significant (i.e., you can reject the null hypothesis and say that the coefficient is significantly different from 0).   If you use a 1-tailed test (i.e., you hypothesize that the parameter will go in a particular direction), then you can divide the p-value by 2 before comparing it to your pre-selected alpha level.

The coefficient for **female** (-2.009765) is technically not significantly different from 0 because with a 2-tailed test and alpha of 0.05, the p-value of 0.051 is greater than 0.05.  However, if you used a 1-tailed test, the p-value is now (0.051/2=.0255), which is less than 0.05 and then you could conclude that this coefficient is less than 0. **CAUTION:** We do not recommend changing from a two-tailed test to a one-tailed test _after_ running your regression. This would be statistical cheating! You must know the direction of your hypothesis _before_ running your regression.

The coefficient for **math** (3893102) is significantly different from 0 using alpha  of 0.05 because its p-value is 0.000, which is smaller than 0.05.

The coefficient for **socst** (.0498443) is not statistically significantly different from 0 because its p-value is definitely larger than 0.05.

The coefficient for **read** (.3352998) is statistically significant because its p-value of 0.000 is less than .05.

The constant **(\_cons)** is significantly different from 0 at the 0.05 alpha level. However, having a significant intercept is seldom interesting.

n. **\[95% Conf. Interval\]** – This shows a 95% confidence interval for the coefficient.  This is very useful as it helps you understand how high and how low the actual population value of the parameter might be.  The confidence intervals are related to the p-values such that the coefficient will not be statistically significant if the confidence interval includes 0.  If you look at the confidence interval for **female**, you will see that it just includes 0 (-4 to .007).  Because .007 is so close to 0, the p-value is close to .05.  If the upper confidence level had been a little smaller, such that it did not include 0, the coefficient for **female** would have been statistically significant.  Also, consider the coefficients for **female** (-2) and **read** (.34).  Immediately you see that the estimate for **female** is so much bigger, but examine the confidence interval for it (-4 to .007).  Now examine the confidence interval for **read** (.19 to .48).  Even though **female** has a bigger coefficient (in absolute terms) it could be as small as -4. By contrast, the lower confidence level for **read** is .19, which is still above 0.  So, even though **female** has a bigger coefficient, **read** is significant and even the smallest value in the confidence interval is still higher than 0.  The same cannot be said about the coefficient for **socst**.  Such confidence intervals help you to put the estimate from the coefficient into perspective by seeing how much the value could vary.