https://www.paper-digest.com/digest_card_pdf

> Help us improve! Select the sentence(s) if helpful, and click on "send feedback" below.

# Paper Digest
Help us improve! Select the sentence(s) if helpful, and click on "send feedback" below.

#### _What this paper is about_

In the private market he pays a premium that depends on the expected cost for providing health care; in a public context health care is free at the point of use and it is financed through taxation. This separation creates fiscal illusion: the treatment is LEVAGGI chosen on perceived quality without a proper assessment of its cost-effectiveness properties.

Finally, the cost of health care depends on its quality, on the effort of the medical staff and on some characteristics of the patients that are not known at the time the contract is stipulated and that later will be observed only by the provider.

In this article the cost minimizing properties of alternative systems to reimburse hospital treatments will be discussed in an environment where the cost for health care is borne by a collective purchaser and hospitals compete for patients via quality.

#### _What you can learn_

The model presented in this paper shows that even if we assume that quality can be indirectly controlled through the behavior of patients, designing a contractual form that permits minimization of costs is rather complicated.

Asymmetry of information increases costs due to an inefficient use of resources and to the information rent the hospital receives.

If hospitals compete for patients in a spatial model, the information rent can be recovered in the form of higher quality, but the inefficient use of resources cannot be avoided.
