https://smmry.com/2686628089#&SM_LENGTH=40

> Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents for free with SMMRY

# Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents
The objective of each agent is to be selected by the DM. Observing the locations, the DM then updates her beliefs and selects the agent whose location maximizes her expected utility, given the updated beliefs.

3 First, in any such equilibrium, conditional on his signal each agent is selected with equal probability independently of the signal.

A key to the equilibrium analysis is whether both signals are strong, where a signal is called strong if the probability that the other agent has received the same signal exceeds one half.4 In any candidate separating equilibrium this probability is the information an agent has about the likely location choice of his competitor.

The DM's strategy is called symmetric if the probability that she selects agent 1 given that agent 1 chooses location x and agent 2 chooses y is equal to the probability that she selects agent 2 if 1 chooses y and 2 chooses x. 4 A signal is strong if the probability, conditional on the state, that the signal is correct exceeds the common prior on that state.

To see why there is no intuitive separating equilibrium when both signals are strong, consider agent 1 who has received, say, signal a and assume that agent 2 plays as prescribed by the separating equilibrium under investigation.

Regardless of his own signal an agent would now benefit from the same deviation if this deviation defeats the other agent if and only if the other agent has received the strong signal.

6 The cheap talk strand of the literature on information transmission games 5 Analogously, upon signal b agent 1 would have an incentive to deviate to a location that allows him to win with probability one if agent 2 has received signal b as well and with probability zero otherwise, and agent 1 would have no incentive to deviate to this location had he received signal a. 6 See, for example, Hotelling, Lerner and Singer, Downs, d'Aspremont, Gabszewicz, and Thisse, Prescott and Visscher, Osborne, Callander and Loertscher and Muehlheusser.

10 Put differently, in Schultz's model there is a state that is common for the agents and the decision maker but only known by the agents.

The agents 1 INTRODUCTION 6 Pandering by better informed, self-interested agents to the preferences of some decision maker(s) has recently been the focus of a number of papers, mostly in political economics.

Credible signaling can occur here on and off the equilibrium path because, depending on the nature of the equilibrium, the uncertainty each agent faces about the other agent's type makes some actions costlier in expectation for one type than for the other type, resulting in credible signaling on and off the equilibrium path.

Suppose were violated, for example, because u(α, xa ) \> u(α, xb ). Then playing xa independently of the signal would be a profitable deviation because it guarantees selection with probability 1 if the other agent plays xb and with probability 1/2 if the other one plays xa , so that overall the probability of being elected is greater than 1/2. So for agents to be willing to separate, u(α, xa ) \= u(α, xb ) has to hold.

Now the most favorable belief for agent 2 is that agent 1 played x if and only if his signal was a, in which case her belief about the state is µ(a, a).

Since on equilibrium each agent wins with probability 1/2 independently of the signal, the deviation pays off.

31 Upon getting signal k an agent's belief that the other agent has received the same signal, π(k|k), exceeds 1/2 if signal k is strong.

If b is the weak signal, agent i \= 1, 2 sets x(a, 0) if si \= a and xb if si \= b, where u(α, x(a, 0 \= u(α, xb ). If a is the weak signal, agent i \= 1, 2 sets x(b, 0) if si \= b and xa if si \= a, where u(α, x(b, 0 \= u(α, xa ). 4 EQUILIBRIUM 19 Thus, despite the fact that agents are purely motivated by winning, the model exhibits a generic separating intuitive equilibria if one signal is weak.

The construction of the unique PSE relies first, as any separating PBE, on an indifference condition of the DM in case the agents' signals disagree and second on the fact that upon receiving the weak signal k an agent has no incentive to deviate to x(k, k) if the equilibrium prescribes playing xk 6\= x(k, k).

Separation can occur here because some deviations become too costly in equilibrium, given an agent's probability assessment about the other agent's signal and hence action.

Upon observing his signal si each agent i chooses a location xi and sends a message mi to the DM. Thus, letting pi \= be the platform or brand of agent i, the DM observes a pair, updates her beliefs and then selects the agent whose location xi maximizes her expected utility given her thus updated beliefs.

Given the restriction to symmetric DM strategies, it still holds that in equilibrium, conditional on either signal, each agent is selected with probability 1/2. Consequently, the same indifference requirements on separating equilibrium platforms must hold as have to hold for separating equilibrium locations in the game without cheap talk messages.

Keeping fixed the other agent's strategy, there is no deviation for an agent that would benefit both of his possible types.

Because π(b|b) < 1/2 when signal b is weak, an agent of type b has no incentive to deviate to a location that guarantees a win only against a type b agent.

How agent 2 updates his beliefs can be 41 Notice the difference to the game where agents move simultaneously.

There each agent's beliefs matter because, depending on the equilibrium, these beliefs can be informative about the action the other agent takes and therefore about the beliefs of the DM. 5 EXTENSIONS 26 abstracted away from, and one only needs to be concerned about how the DM updates her beliefs.

Deviations by agent 1 can be countered by agent 2 by playing x(α) upon agent 1's deviation, which is the DM's optimal location given the hypothesis that both agents are pooling.

The reason is that the endogenous signaling costs disappear for agent 2 who, assuming equilibrium play by 1, is now certain about 1's signal.

With sequential moves, any deviation from prescribed equilibrium locations by either agent would be interpreted as pooling in the present setup and can therefore be preempted through appropriately determined equilibrium locations.

Second, upon receiving signal b an agent's belief that the other agent chooses xb is now only :\= σπ(b|b).

The DM's updated belief that the state is A given that both agents propose xa will be strictly less than 1 even as goes to 0.45 6 Conclusions The present paper analyzes a location choice model in which the agents' locations not only directly affect the decision maker's utility but may also convey information to the decision maker about her bliss point location.

Proof of Lemma 3: Assume does not hold, for example because u(α, xa ) < u(α, xb ), yet xa and xb are set in a separating PBE. But then the deviation to play xb when the signal is a pays off when the other agent plays xa by increasing the probability of winning from 1/2 to 1 and when the other other agent plays xb by increasing the probability of winning from 0 to 1/2.¥ Proof of Proposition 1: If both agents play x independently of their signals, the DM is indifferent between the two agents and randomizes.

If, say, agent 1 deviates to some x1 6\= x, then the DM must choose 1 with a probability smaller than 1/2. For this to be sequentially rational, her off equilibrium belief µ(x1 , x) must be such that her expected utility of selecting agent 2 exceeds her utility of selecting the deviating agent 1.

Though PBE does not restrict the off equilibrium beliefs of the DM about the strategy played by the deviating agent, it still imposes bounds on her beliefs µ(x1 , x): Given the observation the hypothesis that implies the largest probability on A is that the DM assumes agent 1 plays the strategy "x1 if s1 \= a and x otherwise" while the hypothesis that minimizes the belief that A is true is that 1 plays "x1 if s1 \= b and x otherwise".

For any "Prescribed" equilibrium location x there are beliefs that make it rational not to choose the deviating agent: Just choose the off equilibrium beliefs µ(x1 , x) so that x \= x(µ(x1 , x. As for the separating PBE, notice first that one agent choosing xa and the other one xb is an on the equilibrium path observation.

If one agent deviates and chooses an off equilibrium location x, she must not select the deviating agent with probability larger than one half.

Upon observing where x1 is the off equilibrium observation generated by agent 1 and xa is the on equilibrium location agent 2 plays upon receiving s2 \= a the DM's hypothesis that puts most probability on state A is that 1 plays the strategy "x1 if and only if s1 \= a". Consequently, max µ(x1 , xa ) \= α(1−ε)2 α(1−ε)2 ε2 \= µ(a, a).

Now upon observing one agent playing xa and the other one the off equilibrium x(a, a), the DM's belief that is worst for the agent playing off equilibrium is µ(a, a) as may be recalled from the proof of Proposition 1.

To see necessity, notice that agent i can potentially benefit from a deviation both after si \= a and si \= b if upon the deviation he is selected with probability one if the other agent plays xa.

The only deviation that potentially benefits an agent with signal b is one that the DM prefers if the other agent plays xb.

Proof of Proposition 7: To see that x / is not the outcome of a pooling equilibrium, it suffices to notice that agent 2 could play x(µ(a, a (or x(µ(b, b ) after agent 1 played the prescribed equilibrium location x < x(µ(a, a (or x \> x(µ(b, b ). Since there are no beliefs that make it sequentially rational to prefer x < x(µ(a, a over x(µ(a, a (or to prefer x \> x(µ(b, b over x(µ(b, b ) it follows that such a x is not an equilibrium location.

Since there are beliefs that make it sequentially rational to prefer x to any other location, it follows that x is a pooling equilibrium outcome that satisfies CK. Since no type of any agent has a differential gain from a deviation from x , it also follows that any such x is the outcome of a pooling equilibrium satisfying D1. Last, consider the PSE equilibrium outcome x(α).

Agent 1 on the other hand has no incentive to deviate either because agent 2 can simply play x(α) and guarantee that he wins, given that 1's B SEPARATING D1 EQUILIBRIUM 36 deviation would be pooling.

Reduced By: %  Characters:
