https://smmry.com/3399271563#&SM_LENGTH=40

> Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents for free with SMMRY

# Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents
Controlling for the competence of car repair shops, their ﬁnancial situation, and reputational concerns, we use and complement the data set from a nationwide ﬁeld study conducted by the German Automobile Association that regularly checks the reliability of garages in Germany.

As we shall see below, a garage's ﬁnancial situation is an important predictor of its incentive to defraud.

Club members from all over Germany are asked whether they would like to participate in the garage test.

Specifically, the cars must be similar with respect to maintenance-related characteristics that could affect the effort and time required on the part of garages: All cars must 7 Note that the markup is either higher per se or because the expert performs the cheaper minor treatment but charges for the major treatment.

The automobile club sends these cars to garages located in the vicinity of the car owner's residence.

Upon completion of the inspections, the automobile club assesses each garage's performance according to a detailed evaluation scheme that also includes issues related to service, etc.

The automobile club reports for each garage how many of the ﬁve introduced defects were ﬁxed and whether the garage charged for any services illegally.

9 Our binary dependent variable, fraud, indicates whether a garage illegally charged for the provision of services.

The data only cover part of the garages' potential defrauding behaviour, as we cannot account for cases in which customers were charged for more expensive repairs than those that were actually made.

For our controls, we consider the number of faults detected by a garage in the automobile club's data set as an indicator of the garage's competence: The fewer faults a garage ﬁnds, the less competent it is.10 Although one might expect competence to be highly correlated with the other explanatory variables, the maximum absolute correlation we observe is between competence and a critical ﬁnancial situation.

We therefore complement the automobile club's dataset with our main variable of interest and the two controls: We introduce a measure of the competitiveness of the environment in which each of the garages does business, we observe an indicator 9 The original criteria as stated by the automobile club is as follows.

Ad: In order to evaluate the strength of the competition that a garage faces, we analyse the number of competitors in a garage's neighbourhood.

We determine the number of garages located within a distance of 10 km from the garage in question.

11 We obtain the data on the number of competitors of each garage from the publicly available directory of businesses sorted by sector, the German version of Yellow Pages.

We perform a search for Autowerkst¨atten within a radius of 10 km from each garage's address and count the number of results.

Finally, we divide the group of garages into those facing a number of competitors above the median and those below.

Ad: We extend the automobile club's data set by adding information on the garages' ﬁnancial situations at the beginning of the test year.

Ad: We extend the database by adding the garages' distance to the nearest interstate.

As a consequence, these ﬁrms are less concerned about building up a reputation in comparison to garages that are located further away from an interstate.

We consider garages that are located less than 1,500 m from an interstate to be 'close' to an interstate and all others to be 'not close'.

16 We dichotomize the distance to the nearest interstate because cars are hardly ever towed to a garage that is far away from the interstate.

We complement the data set by introducing each garage's exact distance to the nearest interstate, which we calculate using Google Maps Distance Calculator.

17 We take the garage's address as the reference point and the closest point on the nearest interstate as the second point.

The relationship between reputational concerns and fraud as well as that between the level of competition and fraud might be reverse causal, as the choice of a garage's location and thus the distance to the nearest interstate and the level of competition might not be exogenous in explaining fraud.

There are three reasons that a garage's location may indeed be exogenous.

Firstly, the average age of the garages that defrauded 14 We considered garages to have negative equity if their equity was negative at the beginning of the test year or if their equity was positive at the beginning but negative at the end of the test year.

15 The vast majority of towings in Germany are conducted by ADAC. ADAC always tows cars to the nearest garage as a free service for members.

Towing to any other garage is subject to a service fee.

19 These three reasons support our contention that garage locations are not chosen based on the type of interaction or the number of competitors.

Descriptives After restricting the data set, it contains 134 corporate garages, of which 128 did not defraud; that is, we ﬁnd that six of the garages defrauded their customers.

Table 3 illustrates that the two groups \- garages that did and did not defraud \- differ considerably in their characteristics: Garages that defrauded face intense competition less often than garages that did not defraud.

For the controls, we ﬁnd that 50% of the garages that defrauded are in a critical ﬁnancial situation, whereas signiﬁcantly fewer of garages that did not defraud are in ﬁnancial difﬁculty.

The average competence level of garages that defrauded is signiﬁcantly lower than the average level of garages that did not defraud.

Table 3 suggests that garages that defrauded have low reputational concerns more often than garages that did not defraud; however, this difference is not statistically signiﬁcant.

ve out of the six garages that defrauded face a competition level that is lower than the median; only every second garage that did not defraud faces a similar competition level.

Clearly, one could argue that the number of garages is correlated with the population and thus car density.

The OLS results suggest that the probability of a garage defrauding its customers increases by 7.7 percentage points if the garage has low reputational concerns.

Because our results are based on six garages that defrauded and 128 garages that did not defraud, a possible concern may be that individual garages are driving the results.

One out of the 25 garages defrauded, which reﬂects almost exactly the mean fraud level of the 134 garages that do not belong to the chain.

We control for reputational concerns and the ﬁnancial situation of the garages under investigation.

Reduced By: %  Characters:
