https://smmry.com/3326118914#&SM_LENGTH=40

> Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents for free with SMMRY

# Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents
598 THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS RACHEL SMITH AND MARLA B. ROYNE Consumer Literacy for Credence Services: Helping the Invisible Hand The intrinsic problem of credence services is that, by definition, even after purchase and consumption experience, the consumer is unable to assess the quality of what was bought.

Existing literature maintains that to increase consumer literacy for credence services, consumers need access to current, unbiased, credible, self-directed information.

This commentary furthers the notion that government-sponsored websites and search engines can help consumers gather necessary information to make critical decisions.

The framework of Economics of Information Theory includes three categories of consumer offerings: search, experience and credence.

The consumers' predicament is that quality cannot be known even after repeated purchase use; credence services are usually technical in nature, purchased by individuals that lack technical expertise, such that "Only the most knowledgeable and determined consumers have sufficient expertise to support an informed evaluation." It is tempting to label the credence services in terms of what is purchased, but it is more correctly defined as a credence situation is a Visiting Assistant Professor and Marla B. Royne is Professor and Chair, both in the Department of Marketing & Supply Chain Management, University of Memphis.

Unlike a credence situation, a search situation offers consumers enough information to effectively judge the offering prior to purchase, therefore allowing for a well-informed decision.

JCA has published special issues on consumer literacy for two services that typify the credence situation: healthcare and consumer finance.

Because these topics are increasingly complex, confusing, expensive and important to basic well-being, the authors within these special issues, as well as the regular issues of JCA, persistently maintain that consumers need pertinent information to assist in the decision-making process.

Although consumer literacy has been advocated for many offerings in this category, information often remains inadequate.

THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK For services in which the seller holds most of the informational cards, how does the consumer know that the information gathered is in fact current, unbiased, credible, correct and needed? The plethora of easily accessible information on the web could shift the consumer leftward on the ease of evaluation scale from the credence end toward a search situation, but the difficulty in determining credible sources from bogus information, and targeted information from frivolous information move the situation back to the right toward credence.

Asymmetrical information between buyer and seller frequently can lead to consumer fraud, abuse and seller-biased recommendations, i.e., 600 THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS FIGURE 1 Ease of Evaluation Easy Search Difficult Credence Zeithaml 1981 "Opportunistic seller behavior".

The likelihood of a financial institution overcharging consumers either through predatory practice or a mistake depends in part on the amount of information the firm provides the customer.

Credit cards, while providing consumers with many benefits, can prove disastrous for certain individuals who do not understand the terms, limitations and effects of credit card debt.

Because of situations like this, consumer literacy in credence situations remains a major area of governmental concern, involvement and payout.

The Federal Trade Commission concentrates on challenging false or misleading claims when "Those claims are expensive for consumers to verify, or are beyond the competence or expertise of ordinary consumers to verify".

Questions remain as to whether such websites effectively increase the literacy of consumers.

Do consumers receive these sites quickly enough in the search engine priority to be sufficiently informed? Are consumers overwhelmed by unimportant, biased, wrong information? Compounding this situation, the consumers' role in many credence situations has increased.

Healthcare has moved to a more "Consumercentric" model in that consumers must navigate an increasingly confusing health system, steer clear of high "Out of pocket" expenses, evaluate convoluted treatment options and decide among multiple provider settings.

Consumers find financial products increasingly complicated, have more questions about retirement planning, are faced with many more options and understand that employers progressively shift more investment decision-making on to them.

According to Stigler, when marginal cost of search is significantly lowered, the consumer will extract substantially more information, i.e., buy more information.

Further, the more expensive the offering, the greater will be the return from the consumers' pursuit.

By lowering search costs via the Internet and making the informational environment more transparent, consumers increase their well-being.

The consumer gathers much more information in time spent searching, but spends more time sifting through the information to make sure it is good, appropriate and useful information.

Although the web offers an abundance of information, much of it is sponsored and prioritized, not for the consumer's well-being, but rather for the seller's profit.

When consumers search for information on the web, websites appear through search engine optimization and advertising.

Keyword advertising has become the most popular category of online advertising, accounting for 40% of all online advertising, because advertisers pay only when consumers click on their spot.

The consumers then must determine if headings such as "Recommended sites," "Featured listings," or "Search partner," represent a disclaimer, if their findings are a result of their keyword search, or if the process includes a combination of search and advertising sponsorship.

Because consumers do not have full knowledge to discern between paid for and organic results, they can be led to believe that their results are the best findings for their search, when in fact advertisers have paid for the ranking.

As the federal government's main consumer protection agency, the FTC does issue warnings about such issues but does not intervene in the process.

Literacy advocates argue that low literacy blame belongs more to the communicator than to the consumer.

The government is culpable in low literacy; the consumer must not only get the appropriate information, but must get it in an easily usable comprehendible form.

There is precedence in government intervention in turning a credence situation into a search one for the consumer's well-being.

In essence, until 604 THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS governmental regulations required packaged food companies to carefully and specifically label ingredients, consumers faced a credence situation.

The act promotes more healthful foods in the marketplace by arming consumers with ingredient information.

In the last two years, four states and eleven US city and county governments have begun requiring chain restaurants to post calorie content on their menus because of obesity trends and consumers' inability to determine the calorie content of foods offered in such venues.

Other research shows that nutritional disclosure on restaurant foods influences consumer product evaluations and preferences and has been included in the health reform bill.

Far from being a passive conduit of advertising, search engines perform an enormously important function in providing all kinds of information to consumers.

In a nation of consumers who are increasingly responsible for their own choices in credence situations and where the invisible hand feels more like it is in our pocket than on our shoulder, what can be done without increasing costs and hand-cuffing the market? Research indicates that efforts to educate consumers will work best in credence situations.

Behavioral decision research recommends that an informational environment that enables consumers to make choices in their own best interests should be the goal.

Thus, with government-sponsored websites providing better, consumer-oriented websites, and search engines adopting self-regulation policies to increase consumers' knowledge in credence situations, the invisible hand becomes active again.

Reduced By: %  Characters:
