https://smmry.com/8612466580#&SM_LENGTH=40

> Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents for free with SMMRY

# Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents
The five to ten times higher volume of cesarean childbirths in private clinics compared with the volume in government/NGOs health facilities is indicative of the problem of overtreatment.

To understand such cases, the study divides the childbirth system of Bangladesh into two broad categories that are based on the degree of direct financial gain received by physicians on account of the treatments they provide: lower incentive institutions and higher incentive institutions such as private clinics.

The existence of one private clinic, which creates a situation of absolute monopoly, is worse than a situation where many private clinics provide services on a competitive basis.

The existence of alternative types of service providers may help reduce the problem of overtreatment in the private clinics.

Since health service seekers are usually the only source of income for private clinics, these clinics may exploit information asymmetry.

Types of Institutions Lower incentivebased institutions Higher incentivebased institutions Institutions Government and NGO health facilities Private clinics Rationales Physicians' earnings are not dependent on the volume of services provided; they mainly receive a monthly salary.

Generally, physicians' earnings are dependent on the volume of services provided; even the survival of the clinics is dependent on earnings from the provided treatments.

For the second hypothesis, the study uses the volume of cesarean deliveries of the private clinics at the subdistrict level, in order to measure the dependent variable.

If there is only one private clinic in a subdistrict, it is considered an absolute monopoly, and more than one private clinic is likely to increase competitiveness.

The survey data is also helpful to derive an indication of the patterns of child delivery and associated cost; it helps researchers understand mothers' preferences with regard to natural or cesarean delivery.

In the case of NGOs providing similar services, the cost varies from BDT 1,000 to 5,000 for normal delivery, and for cesarean delivery, it can be around BDT 10,000.

The average cost for a normal delivery is around BDT 10,000, and a cesarean delivery is around BDT 40,000-50,000.

Apart from these huge variations, it can be roughly calculated that when compared with normal delivery in private clinics, the cost of a cesarean delivery is around four to five times higher.

If there are no complications during a normal delivery, the average required stay at a health facility is one day, while the required stay for cesarean delivery is three days.

In the case where patients stay more than the required number of days, private clinics may be benefited from that overstaying.

Due to these higher financial incentives, there can be a strong motivation for the physicians of private clinics to go for cesarean delivery instead of normal delivery.

Nature of childbirth and test of hypotheses From Table 3, it appears that the volume of childbirth is more or less the same for the UHC and private clinics, but that the mean value for cesarean delivery at private clinics is much higher than at the UHC facilities.

The total number of childbirths at NGO facilities is 118,012, whereas at the private clinics, it is 279,584.

For cesarean delivery, the mean difference between private clinics and UHC facilities is 58.93; for other government facilities, it is 51.55 and for NGOs, it is 51.73.

These results correspond to the expectation in Hypothesis 1a, since the private clinics have more financial incentive than do the other types of institutions covered in this study, and since the magnitude of cesarean delivery in the private clinics is much higher.

The statistics of the study do however clearly indicate that the private clinics have a preference for cesarean delivery.

In terms of monetary gain, the cumulative cost of cesarean delivery in private clinics is very high, with the total expenditure somewhere around USD 81-100 million.

Table 6 shows that the number of women who make their first antenatal care visit to an NGO also has statistically significant effects on the number of cesarean deliveries in the private clinics (see Antenatal care: first visit to NGO; \= \-.

Respondents' chosen child delivery system in different types of institutions and rationales for choosing cesarean delivery.

Summary of the linear regression models on cesarean child delivery at different private clinics in Bangladesh.

Number of health facilities Government NGO Private clinics Capacities of the health facilities Government NGO Private clinics Antenatal care: First visit Government NGO Private clinics Antenatal care: Fourth visit Government NGO Private clinics Complicated case of pregnancy at private clinics Interaction effects Capacity of health facilities Govt.

10 of the number or the capacity of the government health facilities on the percentage of cesarean deliveries in private clinics.

Table 6 indicates that having a higher number of private clinics at the subdistrict level does not reduce the amount of cesarean deliveries, as \=.017 and p \>.

Among these, 32 locations have only one private clinic, and of this set, 28.12% have 100% cesarean delivery.

From the boxplot, it appears that when the number of private clinics in subdistricts is 'one', then there are relatively more incidences of 100% cesarean delivery.

From the boxplot, it also appears that the median is higher for those places where there is only one clinic in a subdistrict.

The beginning of the 3rd quartile is around 80%, where there is only one private clinic; this may indicate that the number of cesarean deliveries is quiet high in those places.

The existence of only one clinic in combination with the higher level of cesarean deliveries may indicate the effect of the monopoly in the area, and the clinic may capitalize on the situation.

Number of clinics having 100% cesarean delivery Number of clinics having less than 100% cesarean delivery Total Clinics Total Places No of Clinics in different Subdistricts Table 7.

Variation of incidences of cesarean delivery based on the number of private clinics in a subdistrict.

Variation of the volume of cesarean delivery based on the number of private clinics in different subdistricts of Bangladesh.

The practical implication relates to identifying a problem: physicians who work in private clinics in Bangladesh tend to opt for overtreatment.

The findings of the current research may have even broader implications, given that the childbirth system can be indicative for other medical services provided by the private clinics in Bangladesh.

The study found that an absolute monopoly \- a situation where only one private clinic exists in a subdistrict \- can have a worse Downloaded by at 08:20 13 November 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION outcome than a situation of competition between several private clinics.

The study does not find any statistically significant relationship between the practice of private clinics and the existence of government health facilities in subdistricts.

Reduced By: %  Characters:
