
# Summarize articles, text, websites, essays and documents
These three types of characteristics are summarised in Table 1, which gives a stylised presentation of diÆerences with respect to pre-costs, post-costs, which type of consumers buying behaviour the evaluation aÆect, and finally examples of the diÆerent types of characteristics.

Although the trichotomy of "search characteristics", "experience characteristics" and "credence characteristics" seems pretty obvious, economists still use this classification only sporadically.

First of all, consumers do not buy characteristics, they buy products; and it is often these products that we would like to classify-as "search goods", "experience goods" and "credence goods".

The overall quality of a product is determined by a bundle of very diÆerent characteristics-like we saw in the 2 Table 1: Types of product characteristics Characteristic Search Precosts Low Postcosts \- Expedience Credence High High Low High Buying behaviour affected First-time and repeated purchases Repeated purchases First-time and repeated purchases Example Visible fat of a pork chop Taste of a pork chop Animal welfare of pork production case of the pork chop.

The second problem with the trichotomy is that each individual product has an enormous number of characteristics that consumers do not normally bother about but which can however emerge as important experience or credence characteristics.

The emergence of a new and species-transcending brain disease in British cattle has in the 1990s contributed enormously to make the "country of origin" a core credence characteristic of ox meat-contrary to the "ordinary" situation in food products.

Less conspicuous shifts of emphasis on diÆerent characteristics may be endogenous to the dynamics of markets-with a cycle of a characteristic from an important credence characteristic via a status of a market standard to ignorance and fraud and finally back to a core credence characteristic.

The third problem is mainly related to credence characteristics and credence goods.

To make such a specification we shall combine into an evolutionary framework ideas of boundedly rational consumer choice, the characteristics approach to consumer demand and the above mentioned attempts within information economics to develop a trichotomy of characteristics and goods.

2 The main purpose of our specification is to develop the concepts of credence characteristics and credence goods in a way which is 3 relevant for empirical analysis and consumer policy.

In the present paper we shall try to get away from the kinds of credence characteristics that show few of the shifts between manifest and latent elements in consumers' decision making.

We would like to enumerate some of the alternatives to the classical case of bundled credence characteristics where repair services are coupled with expert advice of the amount of treatment is necessary.

Our additional types are "hidden credence characteristics", "standardised credence characteristics" and "stochastic credence characteristics".

6 A little reflection about the conditions of consumers in economic history and about contemporary decision making of consumers will reveal that the first three categories of manifest and/or latent credence characteristics are of greater importance than the last one.

"Ethical" qualities relating to e.g. the welfare of producing animals are typical and still more wide-spread examples of hidden credence characteristics.

If its hidden credence characteristics are latent, it is because consumers temporarily take for granted the e±ciency of the quality control system.

Standardised credence characteristics, in our sense, reflect the fact that practically all goods are complex systems used for complex applications.

Such a composite characteristic is clearly a credence characteristic since it is very costly and probably impossible for any buyer to know all the standards and even more to check whether a specimen of the good is satisfactory with respect to them all.

Probabilistic properties define a huge class of credence characteristics which can best be introduced by analysing the concept of brand.

2.2 Credentials of sellers Until now we have just defined credence goods as goods with core characteristics that can, at best, be known by consumers through costly procedures.

Goods with important credence characteristics will only be demanded to any significant degree provided that sellers are able to show credentials which demonstrate that the buyers have reasons to believe their quality claims.

If the buyer, on the other hand, have credence in the seller, then the evaluation of the credence characteristics is quite straightforward: the claims from a credible supplier should not be questioned.

Credence goods are goods for which the buyer's decision making is dominated by concerns about credence characteristics and thus about the seller's credentials.

The problem of asymmetric information with respect to credence characteristics can be resolved by developing the model of the customer market.

The underlying assumption is that the long-term evolution of both product specifications and the population of suppliers has demonstrated which claims about credence characteristics are false and which are truthful.

Since the detection of false claims with respect to credence characteristics is, by definition, rather seldom, the selection against incorrect claims is quite di±cult.

So the story starts once more... 2.4 The evolution of credence goods in customer markets A seller in a customer market cannot vary the commodity characteristics of its products freely.

In relation to free-range pork we are clearly dealing with a product with 11 hidden credence characteristics as well as standardised credence characteristics and stochastic credence characteristics.

3.2 The pioneering phase We have earlier mentioned that Steenkamp found that Dutch consumers put little emphasis on credence characteristics of food products.

These qualities which are di±cult or impossible to detect but which nevertheless play a role for the buyer, are called credence characteristics.

Credence goods are goods for which the buyer's decision-making is dominated by concerns about credence characteristics.

There are three major types of credence characteristics.

In the first case, credence characteristics cover the "hidden" qualities of a specimen of a good.

Initially the characteristic is subject to much interest among buyers and sellers but the end result is a minimum standard with respect to the particular characteristic.

The market-level evolution of credence characteristics can be modelled as an interplay between consumers and e.g. retail chains with complex portfolios of products.

We have not described a full life cycle of a credence characteristic.

3 Hidden credence characteristics are dealt with by e.g. Steenkamp, Bowbrick and Andersen.

4 Standardised credence characteristics are implicitly dealt with by David and Bowbrick.

16 5 Stochastic credence characteristics underly the evolutionary analyses by Smallwood and Conlisk and Andersen.

6 Bundled credence characteristics are the classical case from Darby and Karni to Alford and Sherrell and Emons.

Reduced By: %  Characters:
