F6361 Page 1 of 3 Analysis ANALYSIS ESSAY Overdiagnosis: when good intentions meet vested interests-an essay by Iona Heath The pursuit of longer healthy life has led to more people being labelled as diseased.

Iona Heath examines the factors behind this paradox and argues that we need to find the courage to resist overdiagnosis and instead accept the inevitabilities of ageing Iona Heath retired general practitioner London, UK Underpinned by webs of financial imperatives and conflicted interests, overdiagnosis and overtreatment have become disturbingly pervasive within contemporary medicine and are now deeply embedded within healthcare systems around the world.

They have permeated and polluted the drug and medical technology industries, medical research and regulatory bodies, clinical practice, payment systems, guideline production, and national healthcare systems.

The main engine is the medical technology industry, which enables healthcare professionals to investigate more and more minutely and to measure and assign numbers to an ever increasing number of biometric parameters.

These numbers are almost always normally distributed along a continuum, with one extreme representing a degree of abnormality that begins to correlate with symptoms and suffering that can be ameliorated or cured by medical treatment.

The problem is that a toxic combination of vested interest and good intentions produces continual pressure to extend the range of abnormal, shifting the demarcation point further into the territory previously considered normal.

1 Symptomless epidemic In pursuing the supposedly self evident truth, we have, for the first time in history, separated our notions of disease from the human experience of suffering and have created an epidemic of disease without symptoms, defined only by aberrant biometrics.

An ever greater proportion of healthcare resources are directed towards reducing these numbers to some fictitious state of normality.

In the process, those who are perfectly well are not only assigned labels that in themselves can be shown to compromise health but are also exposed to treatments with significant adverse effects.

Time and time again, politicians are unable to resist the easy attractions of preventive rhetoric; most recently, English health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, instructed general practitioners that they must do more to prevent the health of older patients deteriorating.

2 If nothing else, this serves to distract attention from the government's failure to meet its own responsibilities for health protection through fiscal and legislative measures,3 such as promoting greater socioeconomic equity, nurturing vulnerable families, and such policies as minimum pricing for alcohol, and plain packaging for cigarettes.

As more and more people previously considered normal are included within the definition of, for example, hypertension, diabetes, or breast cancer, outcomes improve: rates of hypertensive stroke or diabetic foot amputation or breast cancer mortality seem to fall.

In this way, extending the definitions of disease and lowering the thresholds for preventive interventions create the illusion of improved population outcomes, while there is no difference at all in the outcomes for affected individuals.

Clinicians, health policy makers, and politicians have found it difficult to resist these seductive illusions of progress.

Ageing is inevitable The preventing overdiagnosis conference,5 held at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice in the US in September, marked the most recent attempt to draw a line in iona.

F6361 Page 2 of 3 ANALYSIS the sand and to promote more public awareness of and debate about what is becoming an untenable situation, and about what can and will be done about it.

They are to be found in thinking differently and more deeply.

At every level this is a story of unsustainable greed: the greed of those living in the richer countries of the world for ever greater longevity and, most particularly, the greed that drives the commercial imperatives of the pharmaceutical and medical technology industries.

The 2012 World Health Organisation Global Health Expenditure Atlas reported that countries in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development consume more than 80% of the world's healthcare resources but experience less than 10% of the world's disability adjusted life years.

7 This must be untenable in terms of both global justice and the world's capacity.

The problem is that where the OECD countries lead, the rest of the world tends to try to follow.

Ethics and politics Overdiagnosis and overtreatment have at least four serious ethical implications.

The first is the extent of harm to individuals caused by being labelled as being at risk or as having a disease based entirely on numbers or other aberrant investigations and the unnecessary fear that this can engender, which in itself can undermine health and wellbeing.

The third concerns the potential of overdiagnosis and overtreatment to render healthcare systems based on social solidarity unviable because of the escalating costs involved.

The fourth is the way in which biotechnical activity marginalises and obscures the socioeconomic causes of ill health.

9 Arguably, the current ascendancy of medical technology is just such a manifestation of social idealism.

War is peace; ignorance is strength; freedom is slavery-and now we have the latest example of Orwellian doublespeak-health is disease.

Loss of the individual This kind of utilitarian medicine that treats every individual as identical can easily erode the stature and autonomy of patients.

These are the concerns of general practice because our professional objectives are wider than the diagnosis and treatment of disease, but we too need to be careful lest diagnostic or therapeutic exuberance in the individual case blind us to our patients' needs for space and stature.

We are developing a culture of conformity which pays lip service to autonomy and choice but within which the individual is only really free to make the choice that is approved by the state.

It has become difficult to question the means because the end of curing and preventing disease is so obviously worthy.

The means are damaging not least because they are so unidimensional and propagate an intensely normative view of what it means to be healthy and indeed what human life should be.

F6361 Page 3 of 3 ANALYSIS Life is lived forwards but understood backwards so that we are obliged to act in advance of our understanding.

Much of the link between cause and effect remains poorly understood,15 and perhaps we need to be much more rigorous in our expectation of foreseeable harms, and to teach our students to look always for the possibility of harm alongside that of benefit.

In a world where it has become acceptable to treat risk factors, however weak, as diseases in their own right, we must learn to resist overdiagnosis.

Perhaps one of the best places to begin is remembering the words that James McCormick wrote in the Lancet nearly 20 years ago: Health promotion ... falls far short of meeting the ethical imperatives for screening procedures, and moreover diminishes health and wastes resource.

General practitioners would do better to encourage people to lead lives of modified hedonism, so that they may enjoy, in the full, the only life they are likely to have.17 No one was listening then-let's make sure that we listen now.

This is an edited version of an address the author gave to the preventing overdiagnosis conference in Dartmouth in September.

Ebrahim S, TaylorF, Ward K, Beswick A, Burke M, Davey Smith G. Multiple risk factor interventions for primary prevention of coronary heart disease.

McCormick J. Health promotion: the ethical dimension.

Reduced By: %  Characters: